---
title: "Configuring UDP Sockets for ECN for Common Platforms"
abbrev: "udp-ecn"
category: info
ipr: trust200902

docname: draft-duke-tsvwg-udp-ecn
submissiontype: IETF  # also: "independent", "editorial", "IAB", or "IRTF"
date: {DATE}
area: WIT
workgroup: tsvwg
keyword:
 - udp
 - ecn
venue:
  group: TSVWG
  type: Working Group
  mail: tsvwg@ietf.org
  arch: https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/tsvwg/
  github: martinduke/draft-tsvwg-udp-ecn
  latest: https://example.com/LATEST

author:
 -
    fullname: Martin Duke
    organization: Google
    email: martin.h.duke@gmail.com

informative:
 CHROMIUM:
   title: "The Chromium Projects"
   target: "https://www.chromium.org/chromium-projects/"

 CHROMIUM-POSIX:
   title: "udp_socket_posix.cc"
   target: "https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:net/socket/udp_socket_posix.cc"

 CHROMIUM-WINDOWS:
   title: "udp_socket_win.cc"
   target: "https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:net/socket/udp_socket_win.cc"

--- abstract

Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) applies to all transport protocols in
principle. However, it had limited applications for UDP until QUIC became widely
deployed. As a result, documentation of UDP socket APIs for ECN on various
platforms is sparse. This document records the results of experimenting with
these APIs in order to get ECN working on UDP for Chromium on Apple, Linux, and
Windows platforms.

--- middle

# Introduction

{{?RFC3168}} reserves two bits in the IP header for Explicit Congestion
Notification (ECN), which provides network feedback to endpoint congestion
controllers. This has historically mostly been relevant to TCP ({{?RFC9293}}),
where any incoming ECN marks are internally consumed by the kernel, and
therefore imply no application interface except enabling and disabling the
capability.

The Stream Control Transport Protocol (SCTP) ({{?RFC9260}}) has long supported
ECN in its design. SCTP is sometimes carried over DTLS and UDP ({{?RFC8261}}).
In principle, user-space implementers might have leveraged UDP ECN APIs to
deliver ECN markings between SCTP and the UDP socket. The author is not aware
of any such efforts.

However, QUIC {{?RFC9000}} runs over UDP and has seen wider deployment than
SCTP. The Low Latency, Low Loss, Scalable Throughput (L4S) experiment
({{?RFC9330}}) and QUIC have combined to increase interest in ECN over UDP.

The Chromium Projects ({{CHROMIUM}}) provide a widely-deployed protocol library
that includes QUIC. An effort to provide ECN support for QUIC on the many
platforms on which Chromium is deployed revealed that many ECN-related UDP
socket interfaces are poorly documented.

This document provides a record of that experience, to encourage further support
for ECN in other QUIC implementations, and indeed any consumer of ECN markings
that operates over UDP.


# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

This document is not a general tutorial on UDP socket programming, and assumes
familiarity with basic socket concepts like binding, socket options, and
common system error codes.

# Receiving ECN marks

Network devices can change the ECN bits in the IP header. Since this feedback
is required at the packet sender, the packet receiver needs to extract this
codepoint from the UDP socket in order to report to the sender.

There are two components to this: setting the socket to report incoming ECN
marks, and retrieving the value for each incoming packet.

## Setting the socket to report incoming ECN marks

### Linux and Apple

To report ECN, applications set a socket option to true using a setsockopt()
call.

IPv6 sockets require a socket option of level IPPROTO_IPV6 and type
IPV6_RECVTCLASS.

IPv4 sockets require a socket option of level IPPROTO_IP and type
IP_RECVTOS.

For dual-stack sockets, on Linux hosts the application sets both the
IPV6_RECVTCLASS and IP_RECVTOS options to receive ECN markings on all incoming
packets. On Apple hosts, the application only sets IPV6_RECVTCLASS; setting
IP_RECVTOS will return an error.

At the time of writing, an example implementation can be found at
{{CHROMIUM-POSIX}}.

### Windows

Windows documentation recommends using the function WSASetRecvIPEcn() to
enable ECN reporting regardless of the IP version.

However, this can also be accomplished by calling setsockopt() and using
options of level IPPROTO_IP and type IP_RECVECN for IPv4, and IPPROTO_IPV6
and IPV6_RECVECN for IPv6. The author was unable to identify any online
documentation of these options at the time of writing.

For dual-stack sockets, WSASetRecvIPEcn() will not enable ECN reporting for
IPv4. This requires a separate setsockopt() call using the IP_RECVECN option.

Experiments revealed that if a socket is bound to a IPv6-mapped IPv4 address
(i.e. it is of the format ::ffff:&lt;IPv4 address&gt;), calling to WSASetRecvIPEcn()
returned error EINVAL. The author was not able to formulate a generalized rule
about this behavior.

At the time of writing, an example implementation can be found at
{{CHROMIUM-WINDOWS}}.

## Retrieving ECN marks on incoming packets

All platforms described in this document require the use of a recvmsg() call to
read data from the socket to retrieve ECN information, because that information
is encoded in the control data that is returned from that function. Those
platforms all return zero or more "cmsg" that contain requested information
about the arriving packet. 

Examples of the technique described below can be found at {{CHROMIUM-POSIX}}
and {{CHROMIUM-WINDOWS}}.

### Linux

If the incoming packet is IPv4, Linux will include a cmsg of level IPPROTO_IP
and type IP_TOS.

If the incoming packet is IPv6, Linux will include a cmsg of level IPPROTO_IPV6
and type IP_TCLASS.

The resulting byte of data is the entire Type-of-Service byte from the IPv4
header. The ECN mark constitutes the two least-significant bits of this byte.

### Apple

If the incoming packet is IPv4, the socket will include a cmsg of level
IPPROTO_IP and type IP_RECVTOS.

If the incoming packet is IPv6, the socket will include a cmsg of level
IPPROTO_IPV6 and type IP_RECVTCLASS.

The resulting byte of data is the entire Type-of-Service (TOS) byte from the
IPv4 header. The ECN mark constitutes the two least-significant bits of this
byte.

### Windows

If the incoming packet is IPv4, the socket will include a cmsg of level
IPPROTO_IP and type IP_ECN.

If the incoming packet is IPv6, the socket will include a cmsg of level
IPPROTO_IPV6 and type IPV6_ECN.

The resulting integer solely consists of the ECN mark, and requires no further
bitwise operations.

# Sending ECN marks

Existing ECN specifications envision a particular connection consistently
sending the same ECN marking. It might transition that marking after
successfully completing a handshake, recognizing the path or the peer do not
support ECN, or transitioning to a new path. Therefore, using a socket option
to configure a consistent marking is generally more resource-efficient.

However, some server designs receive all incoming packets on a single socket.
As the many connections that constitute this packet stream may have different
support for ECN, it is suitable to configure outgoing ECN on a per-packet basis.

## On a per-socket basis

### Linux and Apple

Both Linux and Apple platforms set the outgoing ECN for IPv4 packets with a
socket option of level IPPROTO_IP and type IP_TOS.

For IPv6 packets, they use level IPPROTO_IPV6 and type IPV6_TCLASS.

This setsockopt() call also sets the Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP)
bits that make up the rest of the TOS byte. Applications making this call will
generally want to preserve any existing DSCP setting, which might require a
getsockopt() call.

For dual-stack sockets, we hypothesize that Linux sockets will require an
additional setsockopt() call with IP_TOS. Apple sockets will not and will
return an error if this call is made. Our experiments did not test this
hypothesis.

An example of the technique described above can be found at {{CHROMIUM-POSIX}}.

### Windows

The author did not experiment with setting a windows socket to send an ECN
mark.

## On a per-packet basis

Packets can be individually marked with ECN codepoints using the control
information that accompanies a sendmsg() call.

### Linux

Linux uses a cmsg with level IPPROTO_IP and type IP_TOS for IPv4 packets.

Linux uses a cmsg with level IPPROTO_IPV6 and type IPV6_TCLASS for IPv6 packets.

In either case, note that the six most significant bits of the data are the
DSCP code point, and in general should be preserved while changing the ECN bits.

### Apple

The author has not conducted experiments with setting ECN marks on a per-packet
basis on an Apple socket.

### Microsoft

Windows uses a cmsg with level IPPROTO_IP and type IP_ECN for IPv4 packets.

Windows uses a cmsg with level IPPROTO_IPV6 and type IPV6_ECN for IPv6 packets.

An example of the technique described above can be found at
{{CHROMIUM-WINDOWS}}.

# Security Considerations

The security implications of ECN are documented in {{RFC3168}} and {{RFC9330}}.
This document is a guide to enabling these capabilities, which incurs no
additional security considerations.

Note that implementing ECN capabilities on some platforms, but not others, can
help to fingerprint the operating system in use by a host, which can have
privacy implications. This document aims to mitigate that possibility.

# IANA Considerations

This document has no IANA actions.


--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

The author would like to thank Ryan Hamilton, who provided constant advice
through this effort. Randall Meyer from Apple and Nick Grifka from Microsoft
provided useful hints about the behavior of their respective operating systems.
